      • Failure probabilities can be hard to estimate.

      • Sometimes FMEA is done only to satisfy the altruistic urge to “do safety”.

FMEA will find and summarise system vulnerability to single point failures, and it will require lots of
time, money and effort. An important question to ask before undertaking an FMEA is: how will the
results be used?


2.7      Threat Modelling for Security

In this section we will discuss common threat modelling methods. Similar to hazard analysis, which
aims to enumerate hazards, threat modelling aims to enumerate potential security threats to a system.
The STRIDE methodology, developed at Microsoft, is a common threat modelling method that has some
similarities with the HAZOPS method (see subsection 2.6.1).
Attack Trees are another common method for threat modelling that has similarities to Fault Tree Analysis
(see subsection 2.6.2).
We briefly introduce both, drawing heavily on the opening chapters of [4]: Threat modeling: Designing
for security, by Adam Shostack. Wiley, 2014. You can learn more there, and this book is currently
available as an e-book from the University’s library: http://library.unimelb.edu.au.


2.7.1     The STRIDE Method

The STRIDE method, akin to HAZOPS, can be seen as a systematic process for brainstorming secu-
rity threats to a system. While HAZOPS focuses on design items, in which one tends to concentrate
on the interactions and communications between system components, STRIDE instead focuses on the
interactions that occur between a system’s trust boundaries.


Trust Boundaries

Definition 2.6
A trust boundary separates one part of a system from another, where the two parts are under the control
of different entities who are trusted to differing degrees. 2

In any system, there will be parts that we as system designers control, such as the software or the hard-
ware components that we supply ourselves. There will also be other parts that we don’t control: for
instance, if we are using an external cloud provider then we likely will not have full control over those
parts of our system that run on the cloud platform. A trust boundary exists, therefore, between the parts
of the system that we control and those parts that we do not control. For the parts we don’t control,
some may be under the control of one entity while others might be under the control of another. If we
trust these entities to differing degrees (e.g. perhaps we trust one more than the other because we have
a contractual relationship with them) then a trust boundary will also exist between those parts of the
system.
Example 2.3
Suppose we are building a website for a business, like the University. The website itself will be hosted

                                                     42
on University servers. However, media like videos and images will be served via a third-party content
distribution network (CDN). This scenario is depicted in Figure 2.13.
Each component in this system lives inside a separate trust boundary. In particular, while the web server
might be under our control, the user and her web browser is not, and neither is the third-party CDN.
However, since we have a contractual relationship with the third-party CDN, we are willing to trust it not
to act in a way that would violate that contract. Therefore, we trust it more than we trust the users (and
potential attackers who might be on the network). 2


The STRIDE Acronym

STRIDE is an acronym: each letter corresponds to a class of threats. The STRIDE approach is about
considering each class of threats and how it might apply to the system. This is somewhat analogous to
HAZOPS in which each guideword is applied to a system to enumerate hazards.
In a similar way, for each of the classes of threat that STRIDE describes, we consider all of the ways
in which that class of threat might apply to our system, i.e. what sorts of attacks might be carried out.
STRIDE’s purpose is to help systematically enumerate the attacks or threats that our system might be
exposed to, and to force us to think about which threats are more serious and should be mitigated in our
system’s design.
STRIDE therefore forces security engineers to “think like attackers”. The threat classes that each letter
of the STRIDE acronym correspond to are:

Spoofing: pretending to be something or someone that you are not.

Tampering: modifying something you are not supposed to.

Repudiation: claiming that you didn’t do something (when you actually did do it)

Information Disclosure: revealing or stealing information that you are not supposed to be able to ac-
     cess.

Denial of Service: preventing others from accessing a system, e.g. by crashing it, making it too slow to
     use, exhausting its storage, etc.

Elevation of Privilege: being able to do something that you, technically, you are not allowed to to (e.g.
     obtaining Administrator or root access on a server).

We consider each of them briefly, illustrating each using the example system above by giving a few
examples. Note that the lists below are not exhaustive.
Also note that the different threat categories are not non-overlapping. Some threats might legitimately
belong in multiple categories. For instance, suppose an attacker is able to modify the access logs for a
system. This threat could be a repudiation threat, since changing the logs might allow them to claim that
they did not do some action that would have otherwise been recorded in the log. However this threat is
also a tampering threat.
The goal with STRIDE is not to achieve a perfect categorisation of threats. But rather to aid as a tool to
help threat brainstorming.




                                                   43
Spoofing This threat occurs when an attacker pretends to be someone or something that they are not.
For instance, an attacker might impersonate a legitimate user of a system (e.g. if they can guess the user’s
password). Or, in the case of a phishing attack, an attacker might impersonate a legitimate website.
Spoofing threats violate the security goal of authentication.
Example 2.4 (Spoofing Threats for Figure 2.13)           • One user pretends to be another user of the web-
    site.

    • The attacker impersonates the university’s website (via a phishing attack).

    • A third party site contains a link to one of the university’s pages that causes the user to perform
      some action on the university site; Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) attack.
2


Tampering This threat occurs when some data is modified that is not allowed to be modified. The
modification could occur to data at rest (e.g. stored in a database or on a website) or do data in transit
(e.g. as it is being transmitted over the network).
Tampering threats violate the security goal of integrity.
Example 2.5 (Tampering Threats for Figure 2.13)      • A rogue administrator for the CDN company
    tampers with the website content hosted on the CDN.

    • An attacker tampers with data in transit between the web server and the CDN.

    • The attacker modifies the website contents (website defacement).
2


Repudiation This threat occurs when an attacker is able to do something bad, but then later on claim
that they did not do it. It usually occurs when a system does not have sufficient logging of actions, or
when the logs are not properly protected.
Repudiation threats violate the security goal of non-repudiation.
Example 2.6 (Repudiation Threats for Figure 2.13)           • The attacker deletes or modifies the access
    logs for the web server.

    • The attacker fills up the disk space on which the log file is being stored.
2


Information Disclosure This threat occurs when an attacker is able to learn information that they
should not be able to learn. It also includes attacks in which an attacker is able to cause sensitive
information to be publicly released.
Information disclosure threats violate the security goal of confidentiality.
Example 2.7 (Information Disclosure Threats for Figure 2.13)        • The attacker is able to steal the
    private key used to secure the users’ connections to the university web site.

    • A rogue administrator at the CDN accesses sensitive website media.


                                                    44
    • An attacker is able to steal the password file for the website.
2


Denial of Service This threat occurs when an attacker is able to prevent the system from providing
service to a legitimate user. Denial of Service threats are often much harder to stop than other kinds of
threats.
Denial of Service threats violate the security goal of availability.
Example 2.8 (Denial of Service Threats for Figure 2.13)           • The attacker commands a bot army to
    flood the website with traffic.

    • The offsite CDN server goes down.
2


Elevation of Privilege This threat occurs when an attacker is able perform some action that the sys-
tem’s security policy does not allow. The most common form of this threat is when an attacker is able
to gain “superuser” access (i.e. Administrator or root access) to a system, when logged-in as an ordinary
user.
Elevation of Privilege threats violate the security goal of access control.
Example 2.9 (Elevation of Privilege Threats for Figure 2.13)    • Somebody connects directly to the
    CDN server to directly access website content that would otherwise be password-protected.

    • The web server does not perform access control checks, allowing one website user to access an-
      other user’s content by issuing appropriate HTTP GET requests.
2


2.7.2   Attack Trees

Similar to fault trees, attack trees aim to deductively explore all of the ways in which a threat might be
realised. The simple variant of attack trees that we consider here has only one type of node, representing
some event that takes place.
Similarly to fault trees, the root node of the tree is the ultimate threat or event whose occurrence we are
worried about. The attack three answers the question of “how could this event occur”?
The children of each node in the tree are the immediate causes or ways in which the event that the node
represents might be realised or might occur.
When a node has multiple children, they usually represent different ways in which an event can occur.
In comparison to fault trees, they therefore represent an implicit OR node. However different attack tree
variants can contain expliti AND and OR nodes, similarly to fault trees.
Given their similarity to fault trees, we do not discuss attack trees in detail here. Consult Shostack [4]
for further details or see the various online resources on attack trees for more information.




                                                    45
Bibliography

[1] Anthony Finkelstein and John Dowell. A comedy of errors: the London Ambulance Service case
    study. In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Software Specification and Design,
    page 2. IEEE Computer Society, 1996.

[2] J. McDermid, M. Nicholson, D. Pumfrey, and P. Fenelon. Experience with the application of HAZOP
    to computer-based systems. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Conference on Computer Assurance,
    pages 37–48. IEEE, 1995.

[3] Peter Mellor. CAD: computer-aided disaster. High Integrity Systems, 1(2):101–156, 1994.

[4] Adam Shostack. Threat modeling: Designing for security. John Wiley & Sons, 2014.

[5] Z. Wei and W. Zhangjin. HAZOP introduction.




                                                46
Figure 2.12: An FMEA worksheet template

                  47
